there's an old joke about a cop who's
walking his beat in the middle of the
night and he comes across a guy under a
streetlamp who's looking at the ground
and moving from side to side and the cop
asked him what he's doing the guy says
he's looking for his keys so the cop
takes his time and looks over and kind
of makes a little matrix and looks for
about two or three minutes no keys the
cop says are you sure hey buddy are you
sure you lost your keys here and the guy
says no no actually I lost them down the
other end of the street but the light is
better here there's a concept that
people talk about nowadays called big
data and what they're talking about is
all of the information that we're
generating through our interaction with
and over the internet everything from
Facebook and Twitter to music downloads
movie streaming all this kind of stuff
live streaming of Ted and the folks who
work with big data for them they talk
about that their biggest problem is we
have so much information the biggest
problem is how do we organize all that
information I could tell you that
working in global health
that is not our biggest problem because
for us even though the light is better
on the internet the data that would help
us solve the problems we're trying to
solve is not actually present on the
Internet
so we don't know for example how many
people right now are being affected by
disasters or by conflict situations we
don't know for really basically any of
the clinics in the developing world
which ones have medicines and which ones
don't we have no idea of what the supply
chain is for those clinics we don't know
and this is really amazing to me we
don't know how many children were born
or how many children there are in
Bolivia or Botswana or Bhutan we don't
know how many kids died last week in any
of those countries we don't know the
needs of the elderly the mentally ill
for all of these different critically
important problems or critically
important areas that we want to solve
problems in we basically know nothing at
all and part of the reason why we don't
know anything at all is that the
information technology systems that
using global health to find the data to
solve these problems is what you see
here and this is about a five thousand
year old technology some of you may have
used it before it's kind of on its way
out now but we still use it for 99% of
our stuff this is a paper form and what
you're looking at is a paper form in the
hand of a ministry of health nurse in
Indonesia who is tramping out across the
countryside in Indonesia on I'm sure a
very hot and humid day and she is going
to be knocking on thousands of doors
over a period of weeks or months
knocking on the doors and saying excuse
me we'd like to ask you some questions
do you have any children were your
children vaccinated because the only way
we can actually find out how many
children were vaccinated in the country
of Indonesia what percentage were
vaccinated is actually not on the
internet but by going out and knocking
on doors sometimes tens of thousands of
doors sometimes it takes months to even
years to do something like this you know
and I a census of Indonesia would
probably take two years to accomplish
and the problem of course with all this
is that with all those paper forms and
I'm telling you we have paper forms for
every possible thing we have paper forms
for vaccination surveys we have that we
have paper forms to track people who
come into clinics we have paper forms to
track blood drug supplies blood supplies
all these different paper forms for many
different topics they all have a single
common endpoint and the common endpoint
looks something like this and what we're
looking at here is is a truck full of
data right this is the data from a
single vaccination coverage survey in a
single district in the country of Zambia
from a few years ago that I participated
in the only thing anyone was trying to
find out is what percentage of Zambian
children are vaccinated and this is the
data collected on paper over weeks from
a single district with something which
is something like a county in the United
States you can imagine that for the
entire country of Zambia answering just
that single question looks something
like this
right truck after truck after truck
filled with stack after stack after
stack of data and what makes it even
worse is that that's just the beginning
because once you've collected all that
data of course
someone's gonna have to some unfortunate
person is gonna have to type that into a
computer when I was a graduate student I
actually was that unfortunate person
sometimes I can tell you I often wasn't
really paying attention I probably made
a lot of mistakes when I did it that no
one ever discovered so data quality goes
down but eventually that data hopefully
gets typed into a computer and someone
can begin to analyze it and once they
have an analysis and a report hopefully
then you can take the results of that
data collection and use it to vaccinate
children better because if there's if
there's anything worse in the field of
global Public Health I don't know what's
worse than allowing children on this
planet to die of vaccine preventable
diseases diseases for which the vaccine
costs $1 and sheíll and millions of
children die of these diseases every
year and the fact is millions is a gross
estimate because we don't really know
how many kids die each year of this what
makes it even more frustrating is that
the data-entry part the part that I used
to do as a grad student can take
sometimes six months sometimes it can
take two years to type that information
into a computer and sometimes actually
not infrequently it actually never
happens now try and wrap your head
around that for a second you just had
teams of hundreds of people they went
out into the field to answer a
particular question you probably spent
hundreds of thousands of dollars on fuel
and photocopying and per diem and then
for some reason momentum is lost or
there's no money left and all of that
comes to nothing because no one actually
types it into the computer at all the
process just stops happens all the time
this is what we base our decisions on in
global health little data old data no
data so back in 1995 I began to think
about ways in which we could improve
this process now 1995 obviously that was
quite a long time ago kind of frightens
me to think of how long ago that was the
top movie of the year was die hard with
a vengeance as you can see Bruce Willis
had a lot more hair back then I was
working in the Centers for Disease
Control and I had a lot more hair back
then as well but to me the most
significant thing that I saw in 1995 was
this hard for us to imagine but in 1995
this was the ultimate elite mobile
device
right it wasn't an iPhone it wasn't a
galaxy phone it was a Palm Pilot and
when I saw the Palm Pilot for the first
time I I thought why can't we put the
forms on these Palm Pilots and go out in
the field just carrying one Palm Pilot
which can hold the capacity of tens of
thousands of paper forms why don't we
try to do that because if we can do that
if we can actually just collect the data
electronically digitally digitally from
the very beginning we can just put a
shortcut right through that whole
process of of typing of having somebody
type that stuff into the computer we can
skip straight to the analysis and then
straight to the use of the data to
actually save lives so that's actually
what I what I began to do working at CDC
I began to travel to different programs
around the world and to train them in
using Palm Pilots to do data collection
instead of using paper and it actually
worked great it worked exactly as well
as anybody would have predicted what do
you know digital data collection is
actually more efficient than collecting
on paper while I was doing it my
business partner Rose who's here with
her husband Matthew here in the audience
Rose was out doing similar stuff for the
American Red Cross the problem was after
a few years of doing that I realized I
had done I had been to maybe six or
seven programs and I thought you know if
I keep this up at this pace over my
whole career maybe I'm gonna go to maybe
20 or 30 programs but the problem is 20
or 30 programs like training 20 or 30
programs to use this technology that is
a tiny drop in the bucket the demand for
this the need for data to run better
programs just within health not to
mention all of the other fields in
developing countries is enormous there
are millions and millions and millions
of programs millions of clinics that
need to track drugs millions of vaccine
programs there are schools that need to
track attendance there are all these
different things for us to get the data
that we need to do and I realized if I
kept it up it kept up the way that I was
doing I was basically hardly gonna make
any impact by the end of my career and
so I began to wrack my brain trying to
think about you know what was the
process that I was doing how was i
training folks and and what were the
bottlenecks and what were the the
obstacles
- doing it faster and - doing it more
efficiently and unfortunately after
thinking about this for some time I
realized I identified the main obstacle
and the main obstacle it turned out and
this is a sad realization
the main obstacle was me so what do I
mean by that I had developed a process
whereby I was the center of the universe
of this technology right if you wanted
to use this technology had to get in
touch with me that means you had to know
I existed then you had to find the money
to pay for me to fly out to your country
and the money to pay for my hotel and my
per diem and my daily rate right so you
could be talking about ten or twenty or
thirty thousand dollars if I actually
had the time or it fit my schedule and I
wasn't on vacation right the point is
that anything any system that depends on
a single human being or two or three or
five human beings
it just doesn't scale and this is a
problem for which we need to scale this
technology we need to scale it now and
so I began to think of ways in which I
could basically take myself out of the
picture and you know I was thinking how
could I take myself out of the picture
for quite some time you know I've been
trained that the way that you do that
you distribute technology within
international development is always
consultant based it's always guys that
look pretty much like me flying from
countries that look pretty much like
this to other countries with people with
darker skin and you go out there and you
spend money on airfare and you spend and
you spend time and you spend per diem
and you spend hotel and you spend all
that stuff like that's as far as I knew
that's the only way you could distribute
technology and I couldn't figure out a
way around it but the miracle that
happened I'm gonna call it hotmail for
short now you may not think of hotmail
as being miraculous but for me it was
miraculous because I noticed just as I
was wrestling with this problem but
suddenly every I was working in
sub-saharan Africa mostly at the time I
noticed that every sub-saharan African
health worker that I was working with
had a hotmail account I thought you know
it struck me like wait a minute I know
that the hotmail people surely didn't
fly to the Ministry of Health of Kenya
to train people on how to use hotmail so
these guys are distributing tech now
they're getting software capacity out
there but they're not actually flying
around the world I need to think about
this some more while I was thinking
about it people started using even more
things just like this just as we were
right they started using LinkedIn and
Flickr and Gmail and Google Maps all
these things of course all of these
things are cloud based and don't require
any training then require any
programmers they don't require any
consultants because the business model
for all these businesses requires that
something be so simple we can use it
ourselves with little or no training you
just have to hear about it and go to the
website and so I thought what would
happen if we built software to do what
I'd been consulting in instead of
training people how to put forms onto
mobile devices let's create software
that lets them do it themselves with no
training and without me being involved
and that's exactly what we did so we
created software called magpie which has
an online form creator no one has to
speak to me you just you just have to
hear about it and go to the website you
can create forms and once you've created
the forms you push them to a variety of
common mobile phones obviously nowadays
we've moved past Palm Pilots to mobile
phones and it doesn't have to be a smart
phone it can be a basic phone like the
phone on the right there you know the
basic kind of Symbian phone that's very
common in developing countries and the
great part about this is it's just like
hotmail its cloud-based and it doesn't
require any training programming
consultants but there are some
additional benefits as well now we knew
when we built the system the whole point
of it just like with the Palm Pilots was
that you'd have to you be able to
collect the data and immediately upload
the didn't get your data set but what we
found of course since it's already on a
computer we can deliver instant Maps and
analysis and graphing we can take a
process that took two years and
compressed that down to the space of
five minutes
unbelievable improvements in efficiency
cloud-based no training no consultants
no me and I told you that in the first
few years of trying to do this the
old-fashioned way going out to each
country we reached about I don't know
praying about a thousand people what
happened after we did this in the second
three years we had 14,000 people find
the website sign up and start using it
to collect data data for disaster
respond
Canadian pig farmers trackin Pig disease
and big herds people tracking drug
supplies when my favorite example is the
IRC International Rescue Committee they
have a program where semi-literate
midwives using ten dollar mobile phones
send a text message using our software
once a week with the number of births
and the number of deaths which gives IRC
something that no one in global health
has ever had a near real-time system of
counting babies of knowing how many kids
are born of knowing how many children
there are in Sierra Leone which is the
country where this is happening and
knowing how many children die physicians
for Human Rights this is moving a little
bit outside the health field they are
gathering
they're basically training people to do
rape exams in Congo where this is an
epidemic a horrible epidemic and they're
using our software to document the
evidence they find including
photographically so that they can bring
the perpetrators to justice Camfed
another charity based out of the UK camp
that pays girls families to keep them in
school they understand this is the most
significant intervention they can make
they used to track the disbursements the
attendance the grades on paper the
turnaround time between a teacher
writing down grades or attendance and
getting that into a report was about two
to three years now it's real time and
because this is such a low cost system
and based in the cloud it costs for the
entire five countries that Camfed runs
this in with tens of thousands of girls
the whole cost combined is ten thousand
dollars a year that's less than I used
to get just traveling out for two weeks
to do a consultation so I told you
before that when we're doing the
old-fashioned way I realized all of our
work was really adding up to just a drop
in the bucket 10 20 30 different
programs we've made a lot of progress
but I recognize that right now even the
work that we've done with 14,000 people
using this is still a drop in the bucket
but something's changed and I think it
should be obvious what's changed now is
instead of having a program in which
we're scaling its lechers such a slow
rate that we can never reach all the
people who need us we've made it
unnecessary for people to get reached
we've created a tool that lets programs
keep kids in school track the number of
babies that are born and the number of
babies that are dying to catch criminals
and successfully prosecute them to do
all these different things to learn more
about what's going on to understand more
to see more and to save lives and
improve lives thank you
[Applause]